Chapter 4: Cython in Practice: N-Body Simulation


Overview of the N-Body Python Code

    overview of simulator - I'm not going to spend time making it.
    
Converting to Cython

    Using cProfile, we can see where runtime is spent. If Pareto Principle holds true, most of the comp cost should be fairly concentrated.
    We can build the Cython extension module directly from the original python file by changing the extension to '.pyx', making a setup.py file that calls cythonize on our pyx file, and then building it.  We can then call then import our new module into a python program.  Simply compiling the pure Python into Cython already provides significant performance improvement.

    Python Data Structures and Organization
        
        We want to optimize the representation of frequently accessed values -  through static typing, and converting Python containers into C structs.
        
    Converting Data Structures to structs
    
        With the C version, accessing and updating the container data will have much better performance, as these operations will use fast C iteration and optimized lookups, rather than the general (and slow) iteration and lookups we know to expect from the Python interpreter.
        We want to leave most of the Python code unmodified, and use the C code where performance matters.  We can accomplish this by making a function that converts Python containers into C structs and/or the opposite.  Functions that utilize these objects will probably have to be modified.
    
    Running the Cythonized Version
    
        it's a lot faster.  It would be even faster using the libc.math function sqrt.  Importing functions, when done properly can drastically imporve performance. 
        
FOLLOW THESE STEPS:

1. Profile the pure-Python version (using the cProfile module or IPython’s %run -p magic command) to determine where the code spends its time

2. Inspect the hotspots for nested for loops, numeric-heavy operations, and nested Python containers, all of which can be easily converted with Cython to use more efficient C-level constructs.

3. Use Cython to declare C data structures equivalent to the Python data structures.  create converters (if necessary) to transform Python data to C data.

4. Convert the hotspots to use our C-level data structures. Remove Python data structures from nested loops to the highest extent possible. Ensure all variables used in nested loops (including the loop variables themselves) are statically typed.

5. Test the code to ensure the modifications have not changed the semantics. Profile again. If performance is not satisfactory, use Cython profiling tools to draw attention to inefficient code.

6. Repeat as necessary.